Add new blog post for otelsql (#4048)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/getting-started-with-otelsql/index.md

---

> title: 'Getting Started with otelsql: OpenTelemetry instrumentation for Go SQL'

Reviewer: Nit: once the colon is gone, you can drop the single quotes too!

linkTitle: Getting Started with otelsql
date: 2024-02-24
author: '[Sam Xie](https://github.com/XSAM) (Cisco)'

> draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---

[otelsql](https://github.com/XSAM/otelsql) is an instrumentation library for the
[`database/sql`](https://pkg.go.dev/database/sql) library of Go programming
language. It generates traces and metrics data while the application interacts
with the database via `database/sql` library. By that, it allows you to identify
errors or slowdowns in your SQL queries that potentially impact the performance
of your application.

This post provides a quick-start guide for using this library.

## Getting Started

> otelsql is basically a wrapper layer for interfaces from `database/sql`. When

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
otelsql is a wrapper layer for interfaces from `database/sql`. When
```

users use the wrapped database interfaces, the otelsql generates the telemetry
data and passes operations to the underlying database.

> In the following, you are going to use the docker compose to run an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following, you are going to use [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) to run an
```

otel-collector example from the otelsql repository. This example uses a MySQL
client with the otelsql instrumentation. The telemetry data it generates will
push to OpenTelemetry Collector, then it shows the trace data on Jaeger and the
metrics data on the Prometheus server.

Here is the data flow:

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
    A[MySQL client]-->B[OpenTelemetry Collector];
    B-->C["Jaeger (trace)"];
    B-->D["Prometheus (metrics)"];
```

> Let's clone the otelsql repository here and run the example. I will walk you
> through some of the most important lines of code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's clone the otelsql repository here and run the example and take a look at the most important lines of code.
```

This is the only(?) place in the document where you use the "I ..." form, let's change this for consistency.

`otel-collector` service via
[OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)](/docs/specs/otel/protocol/).

After receiving the data, the `otel-collector` service will transfer the data
format and send metrics data to the `prometheus` service, and send trace data to
the `jaeger` service.

Let's check `main.go` to see what happens in the `client` service. Here is the
main function.

```go
func main() {
	ctx, cancel := signal.NotifyContext(context.Background(), os.Interrupt)
	defer cancel()

	conn, err := initConn(ctx)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	shutdownTracerProvider, err := initTracerProvider(ctx, conn)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	defer func() {
		if err := shutdownTracerProvider(ctx); err != nil {
			log.Fatalf("failed to shutdown TracerProvider: %s", err)
		}
	}()

	shutdownMeterProvider, err := initMeterProvider(ctx, conn)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	defer func() {
		if err := shutdownMeterProvider(ctx); err != nil {
			log.Fatalf("failed to shutdown MeterProvider: %s", err)
		}
	}()

	db := connectDB()
	defer db.Close()

	err = runSQLQuery(ctx, db)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	fmt.Println("Example finished")
}
```

> This `main` function is pretty straightforward. It initializes a connection with
> the `otel-collector` service, which will be used by the tracer provider and the
> meter provider. Then, it configures the tracer provider and meter provider with
> the `connection` and a shutdown method, which ensures the telemetry data can be
> pushed to the `otel-collector` service correctly before exiting the application.
> After finishing setting up the OpenTelemetry client, it invokes the `connectDB`
> method to use the otelsql library to interact with the MySQL database. Let's
> look at the details here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This `main` function is pretty straightforward. It initializes a connection with
the `otel-collector` service, which is used by the tracer provider and the
meter provider. Then, it configures the tracer provider and meter provider with
the `connection` and a shutdown method, which ensures the telemetry data can be
pushed to the `otel-collector` service correctly before exiting the application.
After finishing setting up the OpenTelemetry client, it invokes the `connectDB`
method to use the otelsql library to interact with the MySQL database. Let's
look at the details here.
```

```go
func connectDB() *sql.DB {
	// Connect to database
	db, err := otelsql.Open("mysql", mysqlDSN, otelsql.WithAttributes(
		semconv.DBSystemMySQL,
	))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	// Register DB stats to meter
	err = otelsql.RegisterDBStatsMetrics(db, otelsql.WithAttributes(
		semconv.DBSystemMySQL,
	))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	return db
}
```

> Instead of using [`sql.Open`](https://pkg.go.dev/database/sql#Open) method that
> Go offers, we use
> [`otelsql.Open`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/XSAM/otelsql#Open) to making an
> [`sql.DB`](https://pkg.go.dev/database/sql#DB) instance. The `sql.DB` instance
> returned by `otelsql.Open` is a wrapper that transfers and instruments all DB
> operations to the underlying `sql.DB` instance (created by `sql.Open`). When
> users send SQL queries with this wrapper, the `otelsql` can know the queries and
> use the OpenTelemetry client to instrument telemetry data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Instead of using the [`sql.Open`](https://pkg.go.dev/database/sql#Open) method
that Go provides, we use
[`otelsql.Open`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/XSAM/otelsql#Open) to create an
[`sql.DB`](https://pkg.go.dev/database/sql#DB) instance. The `sql.DB` instance
returned by `otelsql.Open` is a wrapper that transfers and instruments all DB
operations to the underlying `sql.DB` instance (created by `sql.Open`). When
users send SQL queries with this wrapper, `otelsql` can see the queries and
use the OpenTelemetry client to generate telemetry.
```

> Besides using `otelsql.Open`, `otelsql` provides another three ways to
> initialize instrumentation: `otelsql.OpenDB`, `otelsql.Register`, and
> `otelsql.WrapDriver`. These additional methods cover different use cases, as
> some database drivers or frameworks didn't provide a direct way to create
> `sql.DB`. So, sometimes, you might need these additional methods to manually
> create a `sql.DB`, and push it to those database drivers. You can check
> [examples on the otelsql document](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/XSAM/otelsql#pkg-examples)
> to learn how to use these methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Besides using `otelsql.Open`, `otelsql` provides three additional ways to
initialize instrumentation: `otelsql.OpenDB`, `otelsql.Register`, and
`otelsql.WrapDriver`. These additional methods cover different use cases, as
some database drivers or frameworks don't provide a direct way to create
`sql.DB`. Sometimes, you might need these additional methods to manually
create a `sql.DB` and push it to those database drivers. You can check
[examples on the otelsql document](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/XSAM/otelsql#pkg-examples)
to learn how to use these methods.
```

> Moving on, we use `otelsql.RegisterDBStatsMetrics` to register metrics data from
> `sql.DBStats`. The metrics recording process will run in the background and
> update the value of the metric when needed after the registration, so we don't
> need to worry about creating an individual thread for this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Moving on, we use `otelsql.RegisterDBStatsMetrics` to register metrics data from
`sql.DBStats`. The metrics recording process runs in the background and
updates the value of the metric when needed after the registration, so we don't
need to worry about creating an individual thread for this.
```

After having an `sql.DB` wrapped by `otelsql`, we can use it to make queries.

```go
func runSQLQuery(ctx context.Context, db *sql.DB) error {
	// Create a parent span (Optional)
	tracer := otel.GetTracerProvider()
	ctx, span := tracer.Tracer(instrumentationName).Start(ctx, "example")
	defer span.End()

	err := query(ctx, db)
	if err != nil {
		span.RecordError(err)
		return err
	}
	return nil
}

func query(ctx context.Context, db *sql.DB) error {
	// Make a query
	rows, err := db.QueryContext(ctx, `SELECT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`)
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}
	defer rows.Close()

	var currentTime time.Time
	for rows.Next() {
		err = rows.Scan(&currentTime)
		if err != nil {
			return err
		}
	}
	fmt.Println(currentTime)
	return nil
}
```

This `runSQLQuery` method creates a parent span first (it is an optional step,
it makes the query spans have a parent, and it looks good on the trace graph),
then queries the current timestamp from the MySQL database.

> After this method, the `client` application finished and exited. And, these are
> all the most important lines of code for understanding the example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After this method, the `client` application finishes and exits. They are
the most important lines of code for understanding the example.
```

Why?

## Use the example as a playground

After understanding the example, we can use it as a playground, making it a bit

> complicated to see how it will be used in a real-world-like case.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
complicated to see how it will be used in a real-world scenario.
```

---
title:

>   Getting Started with otelsql, the OpenTelemetry instrumentation for Go SQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Getting started with otelsql, the OpenTelemetry instrumentation for Go SQL
```

linkTitle: Getting Started with otelsql

> date: 2024-02-24

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2024-03-04
```

Please keep this suggestion open such that we set the right publication day before merging

author: '[Sam Xie](https://github.com/XSAM) (Cisco)'
---

[otelsql](https://github.com/XSAM/otelsql) is an instrumentation library for the

> [`database/sql`](https://pkg.go.dev/database/sql) library for the Go programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`database/sql`](https://pkg.go.dev/database/sql) library of the Go programming
```

language. It generates traces and metrics data while the application interacts
with the database via `database/sql` library. By that, it allows you to identify
errors or slowdowns in your SQL queries that potentially impact the performance
of your application.

This post provides a quick-start guide for using this library.

## Getting Started

otelsql is basically a wrapper layer for interfaces from `database/sql`. When
users use the wrapped database interfaces, the otelsql generates the telemetry
data and passes operations to the underlying database.

> In the following, you are going to use the docker compose to run an
> otel-collector example from the otelsql repository. This example uses a MySQL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following, you are going to use docker compose to run an
example from the otelsql repository. This example uses a MySQL
```

Author: This paragraph specifies the `otel-collector` example that we are going to use. Is there any reason to remove the word `otel-collector`?

Reviewer 2: then you should say "the `otel-collector` example" to make it clearer that this is the name of that example and not just an example that uses the OpenTelemetry Collector

client with the otelsql instrumentation. The telemetry data it generates will

> push to OpenTelemetry Collector, then it shows the trace data on Jaeger and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be pushed to the OpenTelemetry Collector, then it shows the trace data on Jaeger and the
```

metrics data on the Prometheus server.

Here is the data flow:

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
    A[MySQL client]-->B[OpenTelemetry Collector];
    B-->C["Jaeger (trace)"];
    B-->D["Prometheus (metrics)"];
```

Let's clone the otelsql repository here and run the example. I will walk you
through some of the most important lines of code.

```sh
git clone https://github.com/XSAM/otelsql.git
```

In the otelsql folder, you can also check out the git tag to `v0.28.0` (the
latest tag while writing this post) to ensure the example is runnable, as the
steps to run the example might be changed in the future. (TBD, need to make a
new tag, so the tag is not v0.28.0, we can use the latest version for now and

> skip this step)

Author: I will update the tag after a new release of `otelsql`

generated on Jaeger.

![example of real-world-like Jaeger UI](real-world-like-jaeger-example.png)

From this graph, we know the entire example takes 1 second to complete. The root
cause of this slowness is not related to the network latency with the database
and the timestamp query. It is the `SELECT SLEEP(1)` query that leads to the
slowness.

You can also learn the slowness from the aggregated statistics of the database
by metrics. And that is the observability the otelsql can provide to know what
your application is doing with the database.

## Compatibility

You might worry about the compatibility issue with other databases and other
third-party database frameworks (like ORMs) and wonder how widely this
instrumentation can be used.

The answer is, from the implementation perspective, as long as the database
drivers or the database frameworks interact with the database (even not a SQL
database) through the `database/sql` with context, the `otelsql` should work
with them.

This is an
[example](https://github.com/ent/ent/issues/1232#issuecomment-1200405070) that
shows how otelsql works with Facebook's entity framework for Go.

## Other cool features

### Sqlcommenter support

> otelsql integrates [Sqlcommenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter), an

Reviewer 2: TIL, that there is a sqlcommenter website, we probably should figure out what to do here since sqlcommenter is part of OTel for a while now (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-sqlcommenter)

Author: Do you mean we should create a sqlcommenter doc inside the website, and use an internal link instead of an external link to do the reference?
